Indian sandalwood is widely valued for its aromatic, fragrant wood, which is one of its main characteristics.

Sandalwood oil is used in cosmetics, aromatherapy, fragrances, and pharmaceutical preparations.
Sandalwood is a very valuable material that is utilized in carving.
Up to 6% oil and 90% of ⍶ and β santalols make up Indian sandalwood (which is claimed to be the highest).
In the worldwide markets, sandalwood is in great demand (20,000 metric tonnes and 1,000 tonnes, respectively), and the present global supply cannot keep up with this demand, which has caused sandalwood prices to skyrocket. Growing sandalwood is a tremendously lucrative industry that requires very little upkeep. Continue reading to learn more about the cultivation process and upkeep information.

In order for the trees to develop healthily, you need the proper climate, land, soil, and irrigation system if you plan to engage in sandalwood farming. To attain a good ROI (Return on Investment), you must plan out the entire procedure in advance.

Climate Condition
Sandalwood trees grow best in hot, humid climates seen in tropical and subtropical locations. The cultivation requires areas at fairly higher altitudes and temperatures between 12 and 40 degrees Celsius (preferably 2000 to 3500 feet above sea level).

Harvesting
Sandalwood is the only wood in the world that is sold by weight, and investing in its cultivation may yield enormous returns. The top-quality sandalwood is occasionally sold for about Rs 10,000 per kilogram, with a market price range of Rs 3,000 to Rs 7,000 per kg. The heartwood of a sandalwood tree begins to develop around the age of eight and may be harvested 12 to 15 years following planting.

Sandalwood is in great demand in both the domestic and global markets. So, investing in the growth of sandalwood will yield substantial rewards.

You might anticipate a harvest of 5000 kg of sandalwood from an acre of land. Sandalwood cultivation will cost around Rs 8 to 10 lakh per acre, but the profits might be anywhere from Rs 1.5 crore to Rs 2 crore.

Required Soil
Sandalwood may grow in a range of soil types, including rocky hard ground, clay-rich black soil, sandy soil, and soils that are red clay-rich. It can even withstand gravelly soil. The pH of the soil needs to fall between 6 and 7.5.

Irrigation
Sandalwood plants require less water to grow. Throughout the summer, the young sandalwood plants require watering once every two to three weeks. In the event of rain, they might not need irrigation.

How can a sandalwood tree be planted?
In sandalwood farming, seeds are mostly used for sowing. You may pick the Chandan seeds from these trees between August and March after they are 15 to 20 years old. Before they seminate on nursery beds, the seeds you have gathered need to be well-treated and dried in the sun. For the planting of sandalwood seeds, the nursery has two different types of seedbeds available:

Sunken beds 
Raised beds
On nursery beds, a seedling can reach a height of 30 to 35 cm after 7 to 8 months. Also, they will get ready for being moved to the primary pitch. You must concurrently excavate a trench measuring 45*45*45 cm for the planting of sandalwood seedlings while preparing the area or soil for the cultivation of sandalwood trees.

When planting seedlings, you must make sure that water will not remain stable in pits.

If the holes contain any water, you must remove them from the sunshine for a few days. Also, you must maintain a 10-foot space between each plant. After four years of planting, your sandalwood trees will begin to bloom.

Species of Sandalwood 
Even though there are various sandalwood species, just two of them—White Sandalwood and Red Sandalwood—are cultivated the most frequently. White sandalwood is quite expensive due to its beauty and therapeutic qualities. It has a variety of medicinal properties that are used in alternative treatments. Learn about their key differences.

White sandalwood
White Sandalwood is a rare tree.
These woods are heavy, golden in color, fine-grained, and hold their aroma for decades, unlike many other fragrant types of wood.
The life expectancy of white sandalwood is up to 100 years.
It doesn't hurt the host all that much, but it may survive as a parasite in the roots of other trees.
Heartwood comes in a variety of hues, from pale green to white.
The leaves become thin and the fruit begins to develop after three years..
Uses

Since its oil and powder are astringents and antiseptics that also act to cure skin conditions like eczema and acne, they are used in health and beauty products.
Used for bronchitis, the common cold, and sore throat therapy.
Help in treating ailments like liver and gallbladder problems, cardiovascular disease, and others
White sandalwood is sometimes used as a flavoring agent in several dishes.
Its oil is used in soaps, perfumes, candles, and medications for its smell.
The isomer of sandalwood oil called santol is used in aromatherapy products.
The outer wood is thrown away and utilized to make figurines and beads.
Red sandalwood
A little deciduous tree 
Wood is a fairly resilient material.
Need plenty of sunshine and a comfortable setting
Intolerant of the cold
Lengthy leaves, 3 to 9 cm
gray-black bark.
This type of tree's wood is unscented.
The formation of heartwood might take up to 30 years.
Uses

Used as a flavoring agent in alcoholic drinks.
Beneficial in the treatment of digestive system problems and fluid retention.
Capable of "purifying the blood."
Red sandalwood may be used to get rid of tan, dullness, dullness, and acne.
In Ayurveda, red sandalwood is used to treat eye disorders.
Can be used as an anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, and anthelmintic.
Conclusion 
The rich scent of sandalwood or Chandan, as well as the fact that its wood products have been utilized for generations, have made Chandan tree farming extremely popular. Chandan Trees, also known as Sandalwood or Srigandha, are the priciest tree species. An evergreen tree, sandalwood is mostly employed in commercial, medicinal, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical products. 

Sandalwood may grow to a maximum height of 13 to 16 meters and a maximum width of 100 to 200 cm. India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Australia, Pakistan, Hawaii, Indonesia, and the Pacific Islands are all home to these sandalwood trees. 

Also, we surely cannot forget what a great investment it is!

Sandalwood Farming FAQs
1. Is sandalwood farming profitable?
While growing red sandalwood costs around Rs. 8-10 lakh per acre, the possible revenues range from Rs. 1.5 to 2 crore.
2. How many sandalwood trees can be grown in 1 acre?
Per acre, sandalwood tree farming: With a spacing of 10 feet, you can plant about 400 (Sandalwood) * 400 (Host) plants in an acre. Sandalwood Standard Plantation In order to grow 600 host plants in one acre, 300 sandalwood plants, and double host plants are required.